---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: Don't Forget to Call the Function
date: 2016-08-28
labels:
  - Software Engineering
  - Learning
---
You write this function with unwavering confidence that you’ll hit “Run” and you’ll be done. You hit “Run”. Nothing happens. You hit “Run” again. Nothing. Did you remember to write a print statement? Are you missing a semicolon? A curly brace? Is there something about JavaScript that you don’t know about? Is it even “console.log”? The time is ticking, the room gets emptier. You can’t find the error. So you start over, taking a slightly different approach. Time is running out; you start to lose hope that you’ll complete the task in time. You wonder why nothing appears in the console. Why it seems as if it isn’t even going through the function.  Then you remember. You learned this on your first day of your first programming class ever. Call the function!
Athletic software engineering exercises are so stressful that you overlook very simple things. Making these small mistakes now, while the code is less than ten lines long is a good way to remember not to make those silly mistakes again. Learning JavaScript this way is more effective and fun than just following some unchallenging online tutorial. Having a time limit is the biggest stress factor, making every misclick is a setback. The stress level really forces you to be as productive as you can. I feel these exercises are really helpful and beneficial to us beginning in software engineering.
The first language I started programming in is C++. Shortly after, I taught myself Java. Java was a very easy second language as it is so similar to C++ in so many ways. However, JavaScript did not come as easy. The weirdest thing about JavaScript that I’ve seen so far is that the variables don’t have types. This also means that the functions don’t have return types. I prefer my variables to have defined types. I like knowing that not when I define a function its output will be in a certain format. I can imagine this being a pain to debug, especially for bigger chunks of code. The console doesn’t give very descriptive error messages either, making it seemingly impossible to find the bug. If an operation was used on an incompatible variable type, wouldn’t it be hard to find since you don’t have the variables defined to be a specific form? Though I do see one case where the type-less variables would come in handy, and that’s in concatenating strings with numbers, which I don’t seem to run into very often. JavaScript seems pretty fundamental, and would probably be the easiest language to learn if you’re new to programming. However, I wouldn’t recommend anyone choose JavaScript as their first programming language. Moving to a new language from JavaScript would probably be really difficult. Based on my experiences so far, I don’t believe JavaScript is the best language for software engineering. However, I still have so much more to learn about the language and there could be much more than just missing variable types. 

